So we've seen that function constructors
can be used to set up properties and
methods on new objects, but
how do we set the prototype,
the other important part of
creating objects in JavaScript?
Let's take a look.
So here's our code from the last lesson.
And the question now is,
how do we set the prototype?
Well there's good news.
When you use a function constructor,
it already set the prototype for you.
Let's go take a look.
I'll refresh this.
Notice that we have our
output of our two objects.
But if I did john._proto_,
which works here inside Chrome,
I'll see that it's some kind of
special Person object that's empty.
It's an empty object, but
where did it come from?
Well, any time you create
a function object,
remember how we said that it
has certain special properties?
Like the name and the code?
Well, there's another property
that all functions get
that is actually completely visible
to you and that you can and
should use when you're using
a function as a function constructor.
So remember, our function is an object,
and JavaScript functions are objects.
Some properties, we don't really
think about that much, like name.
A function can be anonymous.
We've learned that a function
has a special code property
that holds the code that gets
executed when you invoke it.
It's invokable.
And all functions, every function,
every function in JavaScript you've ever
written in your life, has a prototype
property that starts off its
life as an empty object,
and unless you're using the function as
a function constructor, it just hangs out.
It's never used.
But as soon as you use the new
operator to invoke your function,
then it means something.
It sits there.
It lives only for when you're using
a function as a function constructor.
For when you're using a function
specifically to build
objects in this special way,
the prototype property is used.
And it's a confusing name, because if I
see something dot prototype, I think,
oh, I'm setting or accessing
the prototype of this object, but no.
Remember we already saw that in some
cases you can use underscore underscore
proto underscore underscore to
get access to the prototype.
The prototype property on a function
is not the prototype of the function.
It's the prototype of any objects created
if you're using the function
as a function constructor.
All right, let's look at that.
All functions,
every function you create in JavaScript,
gets this special property, .prototype.
There it is.
All right.
So what is it?
It starts its life as an empty object,
and it's always there.
And you can add on to it.
So let's say I add a getFullName property.
Actually a method in this
case cuz it's a function.
And we've already done this.
Return this.firstname + this.lastname
just as a simple example.
All right.
So here's what's happening.
Remember we said the prototype
chain is that every
object has this special property
that points to another object
that is its prototype so it looks for
properties and methods down that chain.
When you call the new keyword
it creates an empty object,
and it sets the prototype
of that empty object
to the prototype property of
the function that you then call.
So, any objects you create using this
function as a function constructor,
specifically using the new keyword and
not returning a value,
letting JavaScript automatically return
that value, means that the object
therefore created not only
has whatever properties and
methods you attached to it inside
the function, but it has a prototype,
which is .prototype
property of that function.
That's where it really gets weird.
It's terribly named.
I'm gonna admit it.
This prototype property of all functions
is where the prototype chain points for
any objects created using that
function as a constructor.
So John points to person.prototype
as its prototype,
as its __proto, and so does Jane.
So they'll both get access to this
method that I just added because
this is their prototype.
Make sense?
So, if I run this,
now that I've added getFullName,
you'll see that those persons added
have the getFullName function.
I can go john.getFullName, and it works.
Just like we did before.
And of course,
the neat thing being that I could add
something to my prototype, on the fly,
later, just like we saw before
because the prototype chain is just
looking at these objects at the moment you
try to access any one of their methods or
properties.
So I could add a getFormalFullName
to the prototype later,
and then,
console.log(john.getFormalFullName.
And because I've added it to
the prototype object already,
when this is called it searches
down the prototype chain.
It searches John.
It doesn't find getformalFullName,
so it searches its proto,
its own prototype,
which is pointing at this right here.
Person.prototype, and
I've already added getFormalFullName.
So it finds it down the prototype chain,
and so then calls it and
the this keyword is set up properly.
We've already learned that too,
and it just works.
So think about this.
That means that any object that
I create with this function,
sometime later I can add
features to all of those objects
at once by using this .prototype
property of the function constructor.
It's pretty neat right?
If I had created a 1000 different objects
using new person, I could give them all,
in one stroke, access to a new method
later, even after they were created.
So often you'll see, in really good
JavaScript code, that properties
are set up inside the function constructor
because they're often different values.
We need that.
But methods are sitting on the prototype.
So why wouldn't you add
getFullName inside here?
Inside the person object?
You could,
inside that function constructor,
inside that object that this is
pointing to, but here's the problem.
And remember that functions
in JavaScript are objects.
They take up memory space.
Anything you add to them
takes up memory space.
So, if I added getFullName, for example,
to every object,
then that means every object gets its own
copy of getFullName and
takes up more memory space.
If I have 1,000 of these person objects,
I'll have 1,000 getFullName methods.
But if I add it to the prototype,
I'll only have one.
Even though I have 1,000 objects,
I only have this method once.
So, from a efficiency standpoint,
it's better to put your
methods on the prototype because
they only need one copy to be used.
Make sense?
I need my properties for
each object cuz it's going to have
different values per object, but
for methods, I only need one.
And when the object calls that method,
the JavaScript engine will go down the
prototype chain to find it and find it.
I don't need it to be copied over and
over again.
So instead of saying this.getfullName
which would put this on every single
object created, I simply put it on
the prototype, and it'll get found.
I can still use it just like I would
if I had put it directly on the object.
Does that make sense?
I'm saving memory space.
All right, because there's only one
prototype for all of these objects, so
it's only in one spot.
So that's function
constructors in the prototype.
I can create objects, and
the prototype is already set for me.
Then I can just add properties and
methods to the prototype
in order to give all of my
objects that I create with this function
access to those properties and methods.
Make sense?
Think about this.
Give it a try.
Try it out.
Try out the code.
This is how you use functions and function
constructors in setting the prototype.
This is one of the valid
ways to create objects and
set their prototype in JavaScript.